---
title: "Performance fees: how they are calculated and distributed."
subtitle: "What is a performance fee?"
date: "11/05/2021"
category: "Copyright"
slug: "royalties-performance-calculation-distribution"
thumb: "/images/recent_post_4.jpeg"
tags: ["redevances de performance", "droits d'auteur", "SACEM", "SPEDIDAM", "SDRM"]
lang: "en"
---

# Performance royalties: how they are calculated and distributed.

### What is a performance royalty?

The question "What is a performance royalty?" is an excellent starting point for understanding the financial organization of the music industry. Cobbant all the while, it's important to clear up any misunderstandings. A performance royalty is a sum of money that artists receive each time their works are broadcast or performed in public.

**In other words**, this means that every time a song is played on the radio, in a bar, restaurant or even at a concert, the artist and others involved must be paid. These payments generally go to the artist, but also to composers, producers and other rights holders.

> It's a legally regulated process in which the performance of a musical work generates remuneration for the parties involved.

- Performance royalties cover a multitude of circumstances, from concerts to music streaming services, radio and television.
- In general, these royalties are collected by collective management organizations such as SACEM in France.

Generally speaking, performance royalties can be divided into two categories:

1. **Royalties from concerts and live performances** These are sums paid to artists each time they perform in front of an audience. The amount of these royalties generally varies according to the size of the event.
2. \*\*Royalties from the public performance of music are paid to artists every time their music is played in a public space, whether in a shopping mall, a restaurant, a sports hall or even during a phone call on hold.

Performance royalties are an important source of income for music creators. Understanding how they work can help you better navigate the complex landscape of the music industry.

### How are they collected and distributed?

**Collecting and distributing performance royalties in the music industry** is a complex process involving several parties. This is largely made possible by the intervention of specialized organizations, such as SACEM, SPEDIDAM, SDRM among others. But how exactly are these royalties collected and distributed? Let's find out together.

- Collection:\*\* The first step in the process begins with the collection of royalties. This is usually done through collecting societies (such as SACEM), which license the use of musical compositions on various platforms and collect the royalties due on their account.
- Royalty calculation:\*\* Once royalties have been collected, they are calculated according to the royalty rate and the number of times the work has been used or performed.
- Distribution:\*\* After calculation, these royalties are then distributed to authors, composers and publishers in proportion to the use of their works.

> It should be noted that there are also royalties for performers and phonogram producers. These are administered by SPEDIDAM for live performances and remuneration for private copying, and SDRM for mechanical reproduction.

Understanding this process is the key to successfully navigating the music industry, which is truly shaped by copyright and the protection of the artist's work.

### Organizations involved in performance royalties

In the music industry, various organizations play a key role in the payment and distribution of performance royalties to artists. These organizations manage artists' rights, and calculate and collect performance royalties. Here's a quick overview of the main organizations involved in this process:

1. **SACEM (Société des Auteurs, Compositeurs et Editeurs de Musique):** This is the main French organization that collects royalties and distributes them to artists. It also protects artists' rights to their works.
2. **SPEDIDAM (Société de Perception et de Distribution des Droits des Artistes-Interprètes) :** SPEDIDAM manages performers' rights for the exploitation of their sound recordings.
3. **SDRM (Société pour l'administration du droit de reproduction mécanique des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs):** This organization administers mechanical reproduction rights for musical works on all media.

These organizations are responsible for collecting royalties from music users and paying them out to artists. It is through their painstaking work that artists are remunerated for their hard work and talent.

> Performance royalties are an essential part of an artist's income. They represent the financial compensation he receives for the use of his works."

So understanding how these organizations work and the role they play in paying performance royalties can be a great way for artists to better navigate the music industry.

### The challenges of collecting performance royalties

As an artist, one of the most valuable sources of income comes from the performance royalties you receive every time your music is played on platforms such as radio, television or online streaming services. However, collecting these royalties can sometimes present several challenges.

- Accurate identification of works:\*\* Knowing where and when your music is played is crucial, but not always easy. Bodies like SACEM, SPEDIDAM and SDRM use advanced technologies to help track performances, but there can always be errors or omissions.
- Fair distribution of income:\*\* The distribution of royalties between all those involved in the creation of a musical work (authors, composers, performers...) can be complex. The rules of distribution are determined by rights assignment contracts, which must be clearly established and understood by all participants.
- International regulations:\*\* Laws governing the collection and distribution of royalties vary from country to country. So you need to make sure that copyright is respected wherever your music is played.

> This is a complex issue, and to understand and deal with it properly requires solid expertise in copyright and royalty management. This is where your music publishing company plays a crucial role in ensuring that your rights are respected and that you receive the performance royalties to which you are entitled.

We'll go into more detail on these challenges in the next few paragraphs, offering possible practical solutions for each obstacle encountered. This is where you, as an artist, will need to be vigilant and perceptive to maximize your earnings from performance royalties.

### Best practices for artists

Music is a passion, but it's also an industry filled with legal and financial complexities. Artists, whether composers, songwriters or performers, need to understand these aspects to protect their work and maximize their earnings. The essential points to know are the various types of remuneration, copyright and assignment of rights contracts. Here are a few recommended practices to guide your musical journey:

- **Know your rights**: Before signing a contract or collaborating with other artists or producers, it's crucial to understand your rights as an artist. This includes rights related to your work, such as copyright, but also your legal rights in general.
- Protect your works\*\*: To protect your works against unauthorized use or reproduction, you need to register with collective management organizations such as SACEM, SDRM or SPEDIDAM.
- Optimize your revenues\*\*: Artists are entitled to remuneration for their work, whether in the form of performance, sales or streaming royalties. Make sure you understand how these mechanisms work, and how you can maximize these revenues.
- Establish clear contracts\*\*: Whether with a label, a distributor or another artist, contracts are legally binding and affect your income and rights. Make sure all terms are clear, fair and in line with your expectations before you sign.

> These tips are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to managing your artistic career. It is always advisable to consult a lawyer specialized in music or entertainment law to guide you through these processes.

### Future trends in performance royalty collection

Collecting **performance royalties** in the music industry is a crucial aspect of ensuring that artists are compensated for their work. With the rise of technology and digital music streaming platforms, this royalty collection is constantly evolving. It's important to be aware of emerging trends to understand how the music industry rewards its most valuable players.

- Streaming:\*\* This trend continues to grow at breakneck speed. Streaming platforms like Spotify, Apple Music or Deezer dominate the music market and are having a major impact on how performance royalties are collected and distributed.
- **Blockchain technology:** This technology offers new approaches to collecting royalties. With Blockchain, artists can be paid directly and immediately every time their music is played, without going through intermediaries.
- Artificial Intelligence (AI):\*\* Also, AI is increasingly being harnessed to automate the royalty collection process. It makes the process more efficient and minimizes errors.
- Data analysis:\*\* Megadata and data analysis are becoming increasingly common in the music industry. Royalties societies can now use these technologies to track where and when a song is played, increasing the accuracy of royalty reports.

> It is crucial for artists, labels and publishers to keep up with these transformations to ensure that all copyrights are properly remunerated. The music industry must adapt and innovate to survive in today's digital landscape.

### Performance royalties: how they are calculated and distributed.

Performance royalties\*\* are an essential component of a music artist's income. They are payments made to artists and music rights holders every time their music is played in public or broadcast on various media. Understanding how these royalties are calculated and distributed can be a complex process. So let's break it down.

### Calculating performance royalties

There are several factors that go into calculating a performance royalty. Whether it's the type of medium on which the music is played, the total number of broadcasts of a song, or the country in which the music is played, all of these elements can influence the amount of the royalty.

| Type of medium | Number of broadcasts | Country |
| -------------- | -------------------- | ------- |

| The higher the number of broadcasts, the higher the royalties. Rates vary by country and market.

### Distribution of performance royalties

The distribution of performance royalties is generally handled by collecting societies (SGC) such as SACEM in France or SPEDIDAM. These organizations collect performance royalties from entities that distribute music, then distribute them between artists and rights holders.

Here's an example of how royalties can be distributed:

- 50% for the artist:\*\* This portion goes to the artist who created the music.
- 50% for the rights holder:\*\* This portion goes to the record company or publisher who financed the production of the music.

> It's important to note that these percentages can vary according to several factors, such as the artist's contract with the record company, the type of license and geographical location.

In conclusion, understanding how performance royalties are calculated and distributed is crucial for artists and music professionals alike. This can not only influence the amount of income, but also contribute to greater transparency in the music industry.
