---
title: "Copyright challenges in the digital age: AI, blockchain and more."
subtitle: "The impact of technology on copyright"
date: "11/05/2021"
category: "Copyright"
slug: "copyright-challenges-in-the-digital-age"
thumb: "/images/recent_post_1.jpeg"
tags: ["copyright", "technology", "AI", "blockchain"]
lang: "en"
---

### Copyright challenges in the digital age: AI, blockchain and more.

### The impact of technology on copyright

In the digital age, technology has revolutionized the copyright landscape, introducing new challenges for artists and music professionals to protect their works.

**The impact of technology on copyright:**

- Ease of duplication and distribution:\_ Thanks to the Internet, it is easier than ever to copy and distribute music, making it difficult to enforce copyright.
- Content availability:\_ Thanks to streaming and sharing platforms, music is more accessible than ever. However, this can also lead to copyright infringement and discussions about fair payment for streaming.
- User-generated content:\_ Social media and other platforms offer users the opportunity to share and create content, sometimes without regard to copyright.

> Copyright in the digital age is a complex terrain, full of new challenges and opportunities. Music professionals need to navigate carefully to protect their works while allowing listeners access to them.

In the modern age, understanding these issues can help navigate the complex and ever-changing world of digital copyrights. In the following sections, we'll look at more specific topics, such as the role of AI, blockchain, the distribution of SACEM, SPEDIDAM and SDRM rights, rights assignment contracts and much more.

### Challenges posed by streaming and illegal downloading

The digitization of music and the rise of Internet technologies have turned traditional copyright models on their head. The situation has been made more complex by phenomena such as streaming and illegal downloading. These aspects present serious challenges for artists, rights holders and collective management organizations (CMOs) such as SACEM, Spedidam and SDRM. Allow me to explain in detail:

- Illegal streaming:\*\*
  This is the streaming of music without the consent or appropriate compensation of the rights holders. If the artist receives no compensation for their work, this can impact on their ability to continue creating.
- Illegal downloading:\*\*
  This is when music files are shared and downloaded without the approval or financial contribution to the rights owners. This includes the distribution of pirate copies and file-sharing via peer-to-peer platforms.

> These illegal practices undermine the music industry's economies of scale, and can devalue artists' works by making them easily accessible without proper remuneration.

_Let's take a look at how technologies like AI and blockchain can help overcome these challenges in the music sector._

### _AI and copyright_

Technology has seen a meteoric rise in recent years with the emergence of artificial intelligence (AI). In terms of creation, AI has changed the game and poses new challenges in terms of copyright. In the following, we will explore how AI impacts copyright, with points such as: works created by AI, ownership of rights and management of these rights.

- AI-created works:\*\* With AI, we're entering a new era of creation in which machines can generate artistic works. Should these works be protected by copyright? Who really owns them? These questions pose a challenge for legislators.
- Ownership of rights:\*\* One of the main challenges of copyright in the age of AI is to determine who owns these rights. Do AI developers own them, or do AI users?
- Rights management:\*\* With the advent of AI, managing copyright becomes even more complex. Who should collect royalties? How can we ensure that rights are respected in an ever-changing digital environment?

> With AI, we face unprecedented legal challenges. The old rules are no longer sufficient; we need to reinvent copyright for the 21st century".

The answers to these questions are crucial to defining the future of copyright in the digital age. In the following sections, we will look at these issues in detail.

### Blockchain as a potential solution

The digital age is modernizing the world of music and copyright at a breathtaking pace. One of the significant changes has been the introduction of blockchain technology, which has enormous potential to transform this industry. But what is blockchain and how can it help solve today's copyright challenges?

_Blockchain_, in simple terms, is a series of constantly growing registers, called blocks, which are linked and secured by cryptography. Each block contains a unique cryptographic identifier of the previous transaction, a timestamp and the transaction data itself.

Here are some of the ways blockchain could potentially reshape the field of copyright:

1. **Transparency of transactions:** The blockchain offers a public ledger of all transactions, making the process of tracking payments and royalties more transparent and easy to audit.
2. **Payment automation:** Smart contracts on blockchain can automate the royalty allocation and payment process, potentially eliminating the ambiguity and delays associated with the current system.
3. **Proof of ownership:** Works of art and music can be registered on the blockchain, offering clear and immutable proof of ownership. This could protect artists' copyrights and avoid numerous disputes.

> Blockchain is a potentially revolutionary technology for the music and copyright industry, but there are still barriers to its adoption. Understanding how it works and its implications requires education and commitment from all parties involved.

Clearly, the potential of blockchain to transform copyright is vast. However, it remains to be seen how this technology could be applied effectively and equitably across the global music industry.

### Recent legislative initiatives

In recent years, numerous **legislative initiatives** have been implemented in an attempt to protect copyright in the digital age. Understanding these new measures is essential to ensure that artists' work is protected and fairly rewarded. Let's take a look at some of these initiatives:

1. **European Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market:** This initiative aims to modernize copyright laws for the digital age. It focuses on the protection of online works and the fair remuneration of creators.
2. **US Music Modernization Act:** This law aims to reform copyright laws for recorded music. It establishes a single collective management organization to grant licenses and distribute royalties to rights holders.
3. **Hadopi law in France:** This law aims to protect artists' works against online piracy. It established the Autorité de régulation des mesures techniques de protection, which oversees the application of the law on the Internet.

### What can we expect from the future of copyright in the digital age?

In an era where everything has gone digital, copyright is more relevant than ever. Artists continue to create a wide variety of works that are worth protecting. At the heart of this new digital era, we can expect unique copyright challenges. Technological trends such as artificial intelligence (AI) and blockchain are radically transforming the way we manage these rights. So what will be the main challenges ahead?

- Artificial intelligence:\*\* AI is taking music production in a whole new direction. Can machines be considered as authors? How will the rights to these AI-generated works of art be protected?
- **Blockchain:** Blockchain technology offers incredible possibilities for copyright. It makes transactions more transparent and secure. However, who will be the real beneficiaries within artists and rights holders?

> Perspective is crucial to understanding the future challenges of copyright in the digital age. We need to recognize the importance of these rights for creators, and strive to find solutions that respect both the law and the evolving needs of our digital society.

Thus, the future of copyright in the digital age brings many challenges and uncertainties. However, with a better understanding of the technical implications of new trends, we have the opportunity to find practical solutions to protect copyright while fostering innovation.
