---
title: "Best practices for copyright audits: how to make sure you're properly compensated."
subtitle: "Why and when to perform a copyright audit?"
date: "11/05/2023"
category: "Copyright"
slug: "best-practices-copyright-audit"
thumb: "/images/recent_post_1.jpeg"
tags: ["copyright", "audit", "best practices"]
lang: "en"
---

# Best practices for copyright audits: how to make sure you're properly compensated.

### Why and when to perform a copyright audit?

Managing **copyrights** is an essential component of any kind of creative work, whether in music, literature, film or the visual arts. Copyright auditing is an important practice which ensures that creators are fairly remunerated for their work. But why and when should a copyright audit be carried out?

- Why carry out a copyright audit?

> In the artistic world, the integrity and value of a work is often determined by its intellectual property. A copyright audit ensures that you, the creator, are properly compensated for your work. It also gives you the opportunity to control the use of your work, prevent misuse and resolve copyright disputes."

- When is a copyright audit necessary?

As a general rule, a copyright audit can be carried out at any time. However, there are certain times when conducting an audit becomes essential:

1. Before signing a rights assignment contract:\_ It is important to know the exact value of your work, and to ensure that you are properly remunerated before assigning your rights.
2. In the event of a dispute over the ownership of a work:\_ An audit can help determine who owns the copyright and how to resolve the dispute.
3. Periodically:\_ Copyright regulations can change, as can the value of your work. So it's a good idea to carry out regular audits to make sure you're receiving the right remuneration.

### Steps to a successful audit

A copyright audit is a crucial step for artists, especially those in the music business. Its aim is to ensure that copyrights are properly managed and that artists receive the income due to them. Here are the steps involved in a successful copyright audit:

1. **Work identification:** The first step is to identify each of the artist's works. This includes compositions, recordings, videos and any other form of artistic creation.
2. **Evaluation of contracts:** It is important to analyze all signed contracts related to the identified works. This may include licensing agreements, assignment of rights contracts, etc.
3. **Verification of contract compliance:** This step involves checking that the terms of each contract are respected. For example, if a contract specifies that the artist must receive royalties each time one of his works is played publicly, we need to check that these payments have been made.
4. \*\*Audits should also review payments received from copyright organizations such as SACEM, SPEDIDAM and SDRM. Check that these payments correspond to the royalty reports.
5. **Corrective action:** If irregularities are discovered during the audit, corrective action must be taken. This may include negotiations with the contracting parties, or legal action if necessary.

> Regular copyright audits are essential to ensure that you are properly remunerated for your work. It also provides peace of mind that your work is being properly managed.

### Common mistakes to avoid

It's very easy to make mistakes when it comes to copyright audits, especially if you don't know exactly which red flags to look out for. Here are some of the most common mistakes to avoid:

1. **Not understanding the terms of the contract:** This is a huge mistake that can cost you thousands of euros in royalties. Make sure you understand every word of the contract and, if necessary, have it reviewed by a copyright lawyer.
2. **Not keeping track of payments:** Like checking your bank accounts, it's essential to keep an eye on all payments made by Sacem, Spedidam, SDRM and so on. This is the only way to ensure that you are properly remunerated.
3. **Lack of knowledge about copyright:** Copyright can be confusing territory. You need to educate yourself on the subject so you know when you need help or when someone is trying to pull the wool over your eyes.

> As an artist, you have the right to earn money from your work. Don't let a simple mistake deprive you of this.

The first step to avoiding these mistakes is to educate yourself. Educate yourself, read up and never take anything for granted when it comes to your rights. You've worked hard to produce your art, so make sure you're properly compensated for your efforts.

### Tools and resources for an audit

Performing a copyright audit, especially in the world of music, requires an array of quality tools and resources. The audit can be complex, given that your revenues may come from several sources, including SACEM (Société des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs de musique), SPEDIDAM (société de perception et de distribution des droits des artistes-interprètes), SDRM (Société pour l'administration du droit de reproduction mécanique), and other copyright entities. Here are some recommended tools and resources to help you in this process:

- Copyright management companies:\*\* These include SACEM, SPEDIDAM and SDRM, which distribute the royalties generated by the public exploitation or broadcasting of your music.
- Royalty tracking software:\*\* There are software programs designed to help you keep track of the royalties you should be collecting. Sequence, RightShare and RoyaltyShare are examples of such tools.
- Legal experts:\*\* It is often advisable to work with lawyers or consultants specializing in music copyright, who can help you understand your contracts and simplify the auditing process.
- Contracts and agreements:\*\* Make sure you have a copy of all your contracts and agreements in place. This includes assignment of rights contracts, recording contracts and licensing agreements.
- Online distribution services:\*\* If you distribute your music online, services such as DistroKid, TuneCore or CD Baby can provide useful reports for tracking your royalties.

> A successful copyright audit starts with the right use of available tools and resources. It's imperative to track and understand how and where your songs are being used, to ensure that you are properly compensated for your work.

### The financial implications of an audit

If you work in the music industry - whether as a musician, producer, publisher or agent - copyright audits are an essential part of your job. They ensure that you are properly remunerated for your work, and are therefore directly linked to your financial situation. Here are just some of the financial implications of an audit:

- **Revenue recovery**: This is probably the most attractive aspect of copyright audits. They can help you uncover sources of income you hadn't considered or had access to before. In this way, they can directly increase your income.
- Audit costs\_: It's important to note that copyright audits are not free. Whether you hire an external auditor or devote time and resources to carrying out your own audit, there are associated costs that need to be taken into account.
- **Detection of possible infringements**: If the audit reveals infringements of your rights, this may give rise to litigation, which may also have financial consequences. Nevertheless, these costs can be offset by the recovery of license revenues and damages to which you may be entitled.

> It's crucial to note that the financial consequences of copyright audits are not just negative. In fact, they can often lead to a significant increase in your income if carried out correctly. What's more, they enable you to take control of your finances by giving you an accurate overview of your copyright income.

### Case studies and lessons learned

Copyright situations can be confusing and often complex. This can easily lead to misunderstandings and costly mistakes. To help you navigate this legal jungle, we've collected a series of case studies and lessons learned to shed light on copyright auditing best practices.

- Case study 1:\*\* A famous singer who wasn't paid for her hit songs
- Case study 2:\*\* A film music composer whose copyright has been infringed.
- Case study 3:\*\* A music group that lost an important source of income due to copyright infringement.

Each of these cases illustrates the costly mistakes that can be made when copyright and its obligations are not fully understood. It underlines the importance of a thorough knowledge of the rules and regulations in force, and the importance of regular copyright audits.

> "It only takes one copyright error to jeopardize your income and your artistic reputation. Copyright audits aren't just a legal necessity, they're essential to a sustainable artistic career."

Let's get started. Read on to find out what these case studies can teach you about copyright auditing best practices.
