---
title: "How SACEM works: a detailed guide for artists"
subtitle: "Everything artists need to know about SACEM"
date: "10/04/2020"
category: "Copyright"
slug: "how-secem-works-a-detailed-guide-for-artists"
thumb: "/images/recent_post_1.jpeg"
tags: ["sacem", "droit d'auteur", "guide"]
lang: "en"
---

# How SACEM works: a detailed guide for artists.

**UNDERSTANDING SACEM AND ITS ROLES**

Founded in 1851 and controlled by its members, SACEM is a private, not-for-profit company that operates as a cooperative. Its ROLES include: Collecting and distributing the rights of authors, composers, music publishers, dubbing and subtitling professionals, poets, humorists and writer-directors. It also works to protect and defend its members, their rights and interests, and their repertoire. In addition, Sacem offers individual professional support to its members in all matters relating to social protection and professional training. And that's not all! It also stands out for its vibrant commitment to creation through cultural action deployed both nationally and internationally.

**IMMERSE YOURSELF IN SACEM PRIVILEGES**

At the heart of Sacem, you take care to declare your works and, in return, receive adequate remuneration according to their exploitation. Thanks to your personal space, you have a multitude of services at your fingertips on sacem.fr. Little by little, you'll amass points for each distribution in proportion to your royalties, building up an allowance to support your artistic retirement (RAES). Don't hesitate to ask for help to bring your creations and ambitious projects to life. You can also benefit from support in your training courses, to enrich your range of skills. We're always at your side, guiding you through health insurance, retirement and tax optimization. With Sacem Plus, the world of music is at your feet, offering a series of exclusive advantages. Thanks to Sacem's community platform, you can expand your network, discover golden opportunities to perform live and attend professional meetings. As a member, you have the privilege of taking part in Sacem's General Assemblies, and you have a say in electing the creators and publishers who represent you and speak out for your rights.

\*\*HOW TO REGISTER A WORK

Registering your creations with Sacem is a crucial step in obtaining the distribution of your royalties. Failure to do so can result in delays and inaccuracies in this payment. Bringing YOUR WORKS to light via Sacem's digital platform, in your personal space on sacem.fr, is a simple, convenient and secure way, thanks to the electronic signature of the rights holders.

Once your declaration has been processed, you can explore the repertoire of your works from your member space. Your creation is now positioned alongside millions of other works represented by Sacem.

To distribute your rights, Sacem oversees :

Mechanical reproduction rights (DRM or Phono), which represent the rights collected when a work is recorded on various media (vinyl, CD, DVD, etc.), video games, the Internet, and much more.

The Public Performance Right (PPR), which represents the rights collected when a work is performed at a show, on television, radio, on the Internet, in public places, at the cinema, and so on.

The right to broadcast a work via recorded media on radios, televisions, in discotheques or other public places equipped with sound systems.

\*\*HOW TO DECLARE YOUR PROGRAMS AND PERFORMANCE DATES?

Sacem, your ally in protecting your copyrights, works on the basis of two crucial pieces of information: the program of works you perform and the corresponding dates of your shows. If you're a singer-songwriter (ACI), comedian, DJ or publisher, declaring your programs (1) is essential, and can be done in just a few clicks from your member area.

The process is simple, and takes place in two stages. First, you create your own program by selecting all the works you plan to perform, thanks to an integrated search engine. Once you've done that, all you have to do is associate your various show or concert dates with your program. In this way, Sacem can collect and distribute your royalties accurately and fairly.

\*\*DELEGATION AND MANDATE

Imagine being able to entrust the management of your works and rights to someone you trust. It's possible, thanks to the MANDATATE (or AUTHORIZATION) option we offer. If you're a creator, you can choose a person to, for example, check your account or request verification of your distributed rights. How do I do this? Simple: simply fill in the "Mandate/Power of Attorney" document accessible from your member's area &gt; Resources and documents. Please note, however, that the mandate does not give this person the power to sign your work declaration forms and associated documents (publishing contracts, audiovisual and advertising data sheets, etc.) on your behalf.

But that's not all! You can also give someone else access to some of your online services, thanks to THE DELEGATION OF RIGHTS IN THE MEMBER AREA ON SACEM.FR. Simply go to the "My delegates" page in your member area. Then choose a person and the services you wish to delegate. Rest assured, this delegation only concerns online services and in no way impinges on the mandate. The person you choose will receive his/her own login and password to access his/her delegate space.

\*\*HOW ARE YOUR RIGHTS DISTRIBUTED?

Before you can distribute your rights, there are five key steps to follow. First, declare your works as soon as they are created. Secondly, declare your programs and show dates. Thirdly, Sacem is responsible for issuing authorizations for the distribution and reproduction of your works. This covers a wide range of fields, including concerts, shows, cinemas, discotheques, cafés, restaurants, shops, television, radio, streaming or downloading platforms, and recorded media.

Secondly, it collects royalties from its clients in exchange for broadcasting or reproducing your works. Sacem has signed agreements with foreign authors' societies to help you collect royalties internationally.

The fifth step is for broadcasters to provide you with data on the distribution and use of your works. This information is essential for distribution, since the sums collected are then divided between the works distributed or reproduced. It's important to note that this process can take from three to twelve months.

For each work, the amount due to the artist is determined according to the medium of distribution. The percentage calculated may be statutory or agreed contractually between the rights holders.

**WHEN ARE YOUR RIGHTS DISTRIBUTED?**

As an artist, did you know that you may well be entitled to receive remuneration up to four times a year from the exploitation of your works? Let's take a closer look at the calendar proposed by SACEM to better understand the distribution rules. You can also consult these rules directly in your member's area.

Rights are distributed on a regular basis, in January, April, July and October. Here's a clearer view of the schedule:

- Historical" TV channels:\*\* In January and April, historical TV channels are liable for royalties.
- Mainstream and other DTT, cable, satellite and ADSL channels:\*\* In April, they contribute to the payments.
- Sound recording in public places, or via a specialized company:\*\* This item contributes to royalties throughout the year.
- Works exploited abroad:\*\* These are taken into account for each distribution.
- Concerts, shows, balls:\*\* These events also contribute to each distribution.
- Internet:\*\* Whether on streaming, download, VOD/SVOD platforms, or via various online content (institutional films, podcasts, video games, paid livestreams), the web is a major player in distribution.
- Radio stations:\*\* Radio stations take part in the January and July distributions.
- Private audio and audiovisual copying:\*\* Royalties are collected in January and July.
- Recorded media, whether in phono or video format:\*\* These are taken into account throughout the year.
- Recorded media (phono) under Biem/Ifpi contracts and centralization contracts:\*\* These specific contracts are taken into account in July and October.
- Films broadcast in cinemas:\*\* These broadcasts are taken into account for each payment.
- Concert retransmissions in movie theaters:\*\* These retransmissions are taken into account for the January and April payouts.
- Discotheques:\*\* Payments are made in January and July.
- Video games:\*\* The gaming world also participates in each distribution.
- Corporate films and webreports:\*\* This content is taken into account at each distribution meeting.

As an artist, you can benefit from these sources of income on a regular basis.
