---
title: "SDRM: its role in the remuneration of mechanical rights"
subtitle: "Understanding the workings of the Société pour l'Administration du Droit de Reproduction Mécanique"
date: "11/05/202"
category: "Copyright"
slug: "role-sdrm-remuneration-droits-mecaniques"
thumb: "/images/recent_post_3.jpeg"
tags: ["SDRM", "droits mécaniques", "répartition des droits"]
lang: "en"
---

# SDRM: its role in the remuneration of mechanical rights.

Understanding the different facets of the music industry can seem complex, especially when it comes to mechanical rights and their remuneration. This is particularly true when it comes to the role of the Société pour l'Administration du Droit de Reproduction Mécanique des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs (SDRM).

\*\*What is SDRM?

> The SDRM is a copyright collective administration society. It administers the so-called "mechanical" rights attached to the physical or digital exploitation of the works of its members (authors, composers and publishers). They receive remuneration for this.

**SDRM's role in remunerating mechanical rights** (in French)

1. **Management and Collection:** SDRM's first mission is to collect the mechanical rights generated by the reproduction and distribution of its members' musical works.
2. **Distribution of funds:** Once the funds have been collected, SDRM is responsible for distributing them among the various rights holders according to precise, pre-defined rules.
3. **Rights protection:** As a collecting society, SDRM also plays an essential role in protecting the rights of its authors, composers and publishers.

SDRM plays a pivotal role in the protection, collection and redistribution of mechanical rights generated by the exploitation of musical works. Its mission is essential to ensure that music creators receive the remuneration due to them.

## Authorization procedures (source SDRM)

- When you obtain authorization from SDRM, it's important to note that it applies only to reproduction rights for the production of a record. However, aspects such as moral rights, derivative rights - including the right of arrangement, the right of adaptation and the right of translation - do not fall within this scope. Similarly, authorization does not extend to rights related to copyright.
- To request authorization, your profile must meet certain conditions. You must be of legal age, or the legal representative of a minor or a person under guardianship or trusteeship.

## Instructions for obtaining authorization.

To **initiate the process,** simply go to **[here:](http://clients.sacem.fr/autorisations)** https://clients.sacem.fr/autorisations. Simply create a new user account or log in to your existing customer area.

**If your order is for 25 to 300 copies:**

Simply enter "yourself" in the "ordering party" field of the request.

For "manufacturer", enter the contact details of your pressing supplier.

**And if you are planning an order of 500 copies or more?**:

Please contact your supplier for details.

**Whatever the situation:**

You'll need to define the reference and add it to the visual. This information is necessary for archiving purposes.

The barcode or EAN13, which is optional, concerns you if you plan to distribute your CD via a reseller or points of sale that use barcodes.

**Once you have requested authorization:**

Simply send us your request number in the "text" field of your order or as a comment, and don't forget to add the reference number of your disc.

## The role of SDRM :

1. Don't forget to [make your authorization request online](http://clients.sacem.fr/autorisations) When you take the initiative, you'll have the opportunity to create your own OPO (Work by Work) producer account. This will give you the opportunity to list all the works you wish to reproduce. Once you have completed your application and accepted the terms and conditions, you will receive an application number.
2. SDRM will then check that the works you wish to reproduce belong to the repertoires it represents. You will receive, directly to your online account, an estimate detailing the amount of royalties to be paid.
3. There are several ways to pay royalties to SDRM:
   - by credit card, by logging on to your producer account [OPO online](http://clients.sacem.fr/autorisations);
   - by bank transfer, using the SDRM bank details available on [the online help section](http://opo.sacem.fr/);
   - by check, payable to SDRM, to be sent to this address: SDRM (OPO) 225, avenue Charles de Gaulle 92528 Neuilly-sur-Seine cedex. Please note the number(s) of your request(s) on the back of the cheque;
   - in cash, if you prefer to pay on site at our premises in Neuilly-sur-Seine, provided that the amount does not exceed €1,100 including tax.
4. Confirmation of your authorization will be sent to you by e-mail once your payment has been received by SDRM. You will then receive a receipted debit note, which will act as your invoice.
